WIP: First draft of HIPE for plugin helpers (#162)
hyperledger/indy-hipe: text/0162-frozen-ledgers/README.md

If a ledger is frozen it can be used neither for reading nor for writing. It will not be caught up by new nodes and can be safely removed. Default ledgers such as the domain, config, pool, and audit ledgers cannot be frozen.

### Implementation notes:
* Implementation of this feature is possible because the catchup of the config ledger happens before catchup of other ledgers.
* We were nervous that removing transactions would break foreign keys in auth_rules, but our testing showed that this is not an issue.
* Frozen ledgers cannot be unfrozen, but dropped ledgers can be recreated with a different ledger ID.

### Implementation steps:
1. Implement LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction handler that will write information about frozen ledger to state.
2. Implement GET_FROZEN_LEDGERS transaction handler that will return information about frozen ledgers from state.
3. Add dynamic validation to all handlers: check if the ledger is frozen.
4. Update audit logic by taking into account the root hashes of frozen ledgers.
5. Fix catch up to not catch up frozen ledgers.

### State schema:
There will be a key in CONFIG_LEDGER that will store a list of frozen ledgers in the following format:

```

> 2:FROZEN_LEDGERS = [

Reviewer: Sorry for the fickleness. Can we change this to `4:FROZEN_LEDGERS`?
After moving this transaction from indy-node to indy-plenum, its marker has changed.

Author: Thank you for the correction.

# Indy HIPE 0162: Frozen Ledgers
- Author: [Alexandr Kolesov](alexander.kolesov@evernym.com), [Richard Esplin](mailto:richard.esplin@evernym.com), and [Renata Toktar](renata.toktar@evernym.com)
- Start Date: 2020-12-22

## Status
- Status: [PROPOSED](/README.md#hipe-lifecycle)
- Status Date: 2020-01-22

## Summary
[summary]: #summary

Ledgers that are created by Indy plugins cannot be removed without breaking consensus. This HIPE describes functionality to freeze a ledger so that it can be safely removed.

## Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> Indy Plenum can be extended through the use of [ledger plugins](https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-plenum/blob/master/docs/source/plugins.md). Ledger plugins can introduce new transaction types that are either stored on existing ledgers, or on new ledgers created by the plugins. The [Sovrin Network](http://sovrin.org) used this capability to develop a [token plugin for Indy](https://github.com/sovrin-foundation/token-plugin) that stored fee and value transfer transactions on a token ledger. After experimenting with the plugin, [they decided to remove it](https://github.com/sovrin-foundation/sovrin-sip/tree/master/text/5005-token-removal/README.md).

Reviewer 2: The definitive decision on whether or not to remove the plugin has not been made.

Author: Agreed. It was intended as context. I made it more generic:

> After experimenting with the plugin, [a plan was made to remove it].

Removing the plugin has three important consequences:
* The data stored on the custom ledger created by the plugin will be deleted.
* The audit ledger will no longer be able to obtain the root hash of any custom ledgers from the plugin.

> * Any authorization rules (auth_rules) on the config ledger that define fees as being necessary to authorize writes to the domain ledger can no longer be handled by the plugin.

Reviewer 3: I assume this is specific to the token plugin vs. some other arbitrary plugin?

Author: I added a note to clarify that these are three consequences from removing the Sovrin token plugin.

The first consequence is intended. This HIPE proposes a feature to address the second consequences to ensure that the network remains functional after the plugin is removed. The last consequence is [treated in a separate HIPE](https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-hipe/tree/master/text/0163-default-fee-handler).

## Tutorial
[tutorial]: #tutorial

> If a ledger has been created, but will never be used, it can be frozen. The LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction will record the root hashes of one or more ledgers in the state trie, and perpetually use those hashes when computing audit ledger validity. This has two important advantages:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a ledger has been created, but will no longer be used, it can be frozen. The LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction will record the root hashes of one or more ledgers in the state trie, and perpetually use those hashes when computing audit ledger validity. This has two important advantages:
```

Author: Great suggestion.

```

## Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

A frozen ledger should only be removed from the system if it has never been used, because in that scenario the hash on the audit ledger never changed. Understanding this limitation requires consideration of three separate properties of the distributed ledger:
1. The ability to achieve consensus when writing a new transaction to the ledger.
2. The ability to catch up nodes through consensus.
3. The ability to audit the history of the ledger to prove that there was no tampering.

When a ledger is frozen, the root hash of the deprecated ledger is available to be used by the audit ledger when computing consensus. So the first property is preserved.

During catchup, the transaction validation logic is not executed. This is because we are catching up transactions that have the ledger BLS signature, so we know it was already validated and we don't need to do it again. So the second property is preserved.

If a ledger is added (so its root hash is expected by the audit ledger), but it was never used (so the root hash never changed), then LEDGERS_FREEZE will preserve the third property even when the ledger is removed.

> But the third property will not be preserved if there is a history of transactions on a ledger and then the ledger is removed. This is because the LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction only stores the most recent root hash, and not the entire history of root hashes, so that history can not be recreated after the plugin ledger is removed. Instead, the frozen ledger should be retained in its read-only state.

Reviewer 2: Using the Sovrin Ledgers as an example, the token ledger has been used on BuilderNet and StagingNet, but not on MainNet.  Based on this statement it would be safe to delete the token ledger data from MainNet, but not on BuilderNet, or StagingNet.  If the ledger were to be deleted from either BuilderNet, or StagingNet the ability to audit the history of the ledger would fail, but how would that present itself, and how do we protect against deleting a ledger that has been used so we can ensure the historical integrity of the ledgers?

Reviewer 2: Added an issue against the `remove_ledger.py` script; https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-node/issues/1659

Author: HIPE 0162 addresses this in the Drawbacks section.

> 3. The ability to audit the history of the ledger to prove that there was no tampering.
> … the third property will not be preserved if there is a history of transactions on a ledger and then the  ledger is removed. This is because the LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction only stores the most recent root hash, and not the entire history of root hashes, so that history can not be recreated after the plugin ledger is removed. Instead, the frozen ledger should be retained in its read-only state.

As the HIPE explains at the beginning,

>  The data stored on the custom ledger created by the plugin will be deleted.
> [This] consequence is intended.

The associated SIP makes clear that this is acceptable for the Sovrin test networks because they are not intended to have a permanent history.

Reviewer 2: The answers focus more heavily on the current intended use case.  I'm thinking more about the impact when something like this is used in general and it's impact to historical integrity.

To summarize my understanding so far:

Once the the ledger has been frozen and deleted, the ability to audit the history is irrevocably lost.
- How does this end up presenting itself from an operational and network administrative standpoint?
- What are the implications to the network and other ledgers?
- What is the impact to the network?

If the ledger is frozen but the data is retained, can the history of the ledger be audited?
- Can this be accomplished if the plugin that created/managed the ledger is removed?

Reviewer 2: Would this then be a fair summary?

Once a ledger is frozen and the associated plug-in is removed, regardless of whether or not you keep the data, the history of the associated ledger(s) cannot be audited.  In order to audit their history you would have to retain the ledger data (not delete the ledger after freezing it) and restore the plugin (or computational equivalent) first.

Reviewer 2: How does a frozen ledger affect new nodes added to the network.  I assume, whether or not the frozen ledgers data was retained, only the hash at the point in time the ledger was frozen will be replicated to any new nodes.  Is this correct?

Author: > Would this then be a fair summary?
> Once a ledger is frozen and the associated plug-in is removed, regardless of whether or not you keep the data, the history of the associated ledger(s) cannot be audited. In order to audit their history you would have to retain the ledger data (not delete the ledger after freezing it) and restore the plugin (or computational equivalent) first.

I disagree with the sentiment that the history cannot be audited even if you keep the data. The audit process is the same as before, because audits are done outside the ledger software and independent of what plugins are installed on the ledger. To perform an accurate audit you will need to track the history of the software that was installed so that you can confirm the validation rules that were used for the original ledger writes.

Author: > How does a frozen ledger affect new nodes added to the network. I assume, whether or not the frozen ledgers data was retained, only the hash at the point in time the ledger was frozen will be replicated to any new nodes. Is this correct? I think this may already be implied by the fact the frozen ledger will not be included in catch up operations.

I believe that the ledger data is propagated during catch up to the rest of the pool, even for frozen ledgers. This is because validation is not done for transactions that already have a BLS signature. Is that correct @Toktar ?

Author: I see this note from @anton.denishchenko: "Frozen ledgers are not catched up (this is possible because the LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction is part of the  config ledger, which is applied before additional ledgers)."
Thank you @WadeBarnes for highlighting this misunderstanding. I'll add a note about this topic to the HIPE.

```

## Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

A frozen ledger should only be removed from the system if it has never been used, because in that scenario the hash on the audit ledger never changed. Understanding this limitation requires consideration of three separate properties of the distributed ledger:
1. The ability to achieve consensus when writing a new transaction to the ledger.
2. The ability to catch up nodes through consensus.
3. The ability to audit the history of the ledger to prove that there was no tampering.

When a ledger is frozen, the root hash of the deprecated ledger is available to be used by the audit ledger when computing consensus. So the first property is preserved.

During catchup, the transaction validation logic is not executed. This is because we are catching up transactions that have the ledger BLS signature, so we know it was already validated and we don't need to do it again. So the second property is preserved.

If a ledger is added (so its root hash is expected by the audit ledger), but it was never used (so the root hash never changed), then LEDGERS_FREEZE will preserve the third property even when the ledger is removed.

> But the third property will not be preserved if there is a history of transactions on a ledger and then the ledger is removed. This is because the LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction only stores the most recent root hash, and not the entire history of root hashes, so that history can not be recreated after the plugin ledger is removed. Instead, the frozen ledger should be retained in its read-only state and new nodes in the pool should manually backup the data from frozen ledgers since they are not included in catchup.

Reviewer 2: `and new nodes in the pool should manually backup the data from frozen ledgers since they are not included in catchup.`

This would be additional administrative overhead and could easily be overlooked or done incorrectly.  It's definitely something that needs to be addressed at some point before too long.  I would think It would be best addressed by the existing catch-up process.

How much effort would be required to support catch-up of frozen ledgers?  The need for this should at least be captured in a ticket so it's not forgotten.

Author: It's too much work for that feature without someone planning to use it, but here is the issue:
https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-plenum/issues/1524
